Gateway API blog post - 04-22-2021 (#27558)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2021-04-22-gateway-api/2021-04-22-gateway-api.md

---
layout: blog
title: 'Evolving Service networking with the Gateway API'
date: 2021-04-22

> slug: gateway-api

Reviewer: ```suggestion
slug: evolving-service-networking-with-the-gateway-api
```
Small thing, but the slug should ideally match the title of the page^^;;;

Author: I have updated the title and the slug to "Evolving Kubernetes networking with the Gateway API"

---

> **Authors:** Mark Church (Google), Harry Bagdi (Kong), Daneyon Hanson (Red Hat), Nick Young (VMware), Manuel Zapf (Traefik)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Authors:** Mark Church (Google), Harry Bagdi (Kong), Daneyon Hanson (Red Hat), Nick Young (VMware), Manuel Zapf (Traefik Labs)
```

Sorry @mark-church, I missed that at the initial doc ;)

> The Ingress resource is one of the many Kubernetes success stories. It created an [ecosystem of implementations](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress-controllers/) on which many diverse projects were able to deliver their functionality to hundreds of thousands of Kubernetes clusters in a standardized and consistent way. This standardization helped users adopt Kubernetes. However, five years after the creation of Ingress, there are signs of fragmentation into different but strikingly similar CRDs and [overloaded annotations](https://kubernetes.github.io/ingress-nginx/user-guide/nginx-configuration/annotations/). The same portability that made Ingress pervasive has also limited what it can do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Ingress resource is one of the many Kubernetes success stories. It created an [ecosystem of implementations](/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress-controllers/) on which many diverse projects were able to deliver their functionality to hundreds of thousands of Kubernetes clusters in a standardized and consistent way. This standardization helped users adopt Kubernetes. However, five years after the creation of Ingress, there are signs of fragmentation into different but strikingly similar CRDs and [overloaded annotations](https://kubernetes.github.io/ingress-nginx/user-guide/nginx-configuration/annotations/). The same portability that made Ingress pervasive has also limited what it can do.
```

- **Flexible conformance** - This is where the Gateway API aims to improve the portability Ingress through more [flexible conformance](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/guidelines/#conformance). With core (mandatory support), extended (portable if supported), and custom (no portability guarantee) conformance levels, the API is explicit about its portability without constraining implementations-specific capabilities.

### What does the Gateway API look like?

The Gateway API introduces a few new resource types:

- **GatewayClasses** are a cluster-scoped resource that act as templates to explicitly define behavior for Gateways derived from them. This is similar in concept to StorageClasses, but for Gateways, our Ingress-like object.
- **Gateways** are the deployed instances of GatewayClasses. They are the logical representation of the data-plane which performs routing, which may be in-cluster proxies, hardware LBs, or cloud LBs.
- **HTTPRoutes** are the matching, filtering, and routing rules that get applied to Gateways, which results in the configuration of the underlying data-plane. There are also other kinds of Routes that exist too (since they are protocol-specific).

> - **xRoutes** are not a resource itself, but represent that Routes are protocol-specific. This provides a path for future evolution.  TLSRoutes, TCPRoutes, and UDPRoutes already have proposals with the future possibility of other protocols such as GRPCRoutes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **xRoutes** are not a resource itself, but represent that Routes are protocol-specific. This provides a path for future evolution. TLSRoutes, TCPRoutes, and UDPRoutes are already included in the core API and implementations are encouraged to create their own Route resources.
```

Reviewer 4: +1, that's more correct.

Author: Have updated this to:

**Routes** represent many different protocol-specific Route resources. These include HTTPRoutes, TCPRoutes, and UDPRoutes which have protocol-specific routing semantics. This also allows the Gateway API to expand its protocol support in the future.

> ![gateway-api-resources](./gateway-api-resources.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![gateway-api-resources](gateway-api-resources.png)
```
I think this is a Hugo'ism, but the images aren't loading in the preview. - https://deploy-preview-27558--kubernetes-io-master-staging.netlify.app/blog/2021/04/22/gateway-api/

As an alternative if you want control over the size of the image themselves you can use img tags.

Reviewer 5: Also, please consider setting the text alternative to be a meaningful phrase, with spaces between words.

Author: Added alt text to all the images

### Gateway Controller Implementations

> The good news is that although Gateway is in [v1Alpha1](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/releases), there are already several [Gateway controller implementations](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/references/implementations/) that you can run. Since it’s a standardized spec, the following example could be run on any of them and should function the exact same way. Check out [getting started](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/getting-started/) to see how to install and use one of these Gateway controllers.

Reviewer 3: nit:
```suggestion
The good news is that although Gateway is in [v1alpha1](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/releases), there are already several [Gateway controller implementations](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/references/implementations/) that you can run. Since it’s a standardized spec, the following example could be run on any of them and should function the exact same way. Check out [getting started](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/guides/getting-started/) to see how to install and use one of these Gateway controllers.
```

Reviewer 5: I'd just say it's in alpha. If the API version were v1alpha2 it'd still be in alpha.

Reviewer 4: +1 to just "is in alpha".

## Getting Hands-on with the Gateway API

In the following example, we’ll demonstrate the relationships between the different API Resources and walk you through a common use case:

*   Team foo has their app deployed in the foo Namespace. They need to control the routing logic for the different pages of their app.
*   Team bar is running in the bar Namespace. They want to be able to do blue-green rollouts of their application to reduce risk.
*   The platform team is responsible for managing the load balancer and network security of all the apps in the Kubernetes cluster.

The following foo-route does path matching to various Services in the foo Namespace and also has a default route to a 404 server. This exposes foo-auth and foo-home Services via `foo.example.com/login` and `foo.example.com/home` respectively.:

> ```

Reviewer 5: If you append `yaml` to this line, the website adds syntax highlighting.

Reviewer 3: +1
Reading without highlighting is very taxing.

@sftim is there a way to make some parts of YAML bold? Like in the Administrative Delegation section, we want to focus on the labels in the HTTPRoute resource.

Reviewer 5: The syntax highlighter doesn't offer you that. What you can add is explanatory YAML comments.

Author: @hbagdi lmk if there are any portions that we should add comments to

kind: HTTPRoute
apiVersion: networking.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
metadata:
  name: foo-route
  namespace: foo
  labels:
    gateway: external-https-prod
spec:
  hostnames:
  - "foo.example.com"
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: Prefix
        value: /login
    forwardTo:
    - serviceName: foo-auth
      port: 8080
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: Prefix
        value: /home
    forwardTo:
    - serviceName: foo-home
      port: 8080
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: Prefix
        value: /
    forwardTo:
    - serviceName: foo-404
      port: 8080
```

The bar team, operating in the bar Namespace of the same Kubernetes cluster, also wishes to expose their application to the internet, but they also want to control their own canary and blue-green rollouts. The following HTTPRoute is configured for the following behavior:

*   For traffic to `bar.example.com`:
    *   Send 90% of the traffic to bar-v1
    *   Send 10% of the traffic to bar-v2
*   For traffic to `bar.example.com` with the HTTP header `env: canary`:
    
    *   Send all the traffic to bar-v2
    

> ![httproute](./httproute.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![httproute](httproute.png)
```

```
kind: HTTPRoute
apiVersion: networking.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
metadata:
  name: bar-route
  namespace: bar
  labels:
    gateway: external-https-prod
spec:
  hostnames:
  - "bar.example.com"
  rules:
  - forwardTo:
    - serviceName: bar-v1
      port: 8080
      weight: 90
    - serviceName: bar-v2
      port: 8080
      weight: 10
  - matches:
    - headers:
        values:
          env: canary
    forwardTo:
    - serviceName: bar-v2
      port: 8080
```

### Route and Gateway Binding

> So we have two HTTPRoutes matching and routing traffic to different Services. You might be wondering, where are these Routes accessible? Through which networks or IPs are they exposed? 

Reviewer 3: nit:

```suggestion
So we have two HTTPRoutes matching and routing traffic to different Services. You might be wondering, where are these Services accessible? Through which networks or IPs are they exposed? 
```

I _think_ users are not looking for a way to access a Route, and that makes less sense than Service, because Routes are a way to represent configuration, while a Service is an abstraction of an application running on a network endpoint. The latter is a bit more concrete.

Author: yup this makes sense. Updates

How Routes are exposed to clients is governed by [Route binding](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/api-overview/#route-binding), which describes how Routes and Gateways create a bidirectional relationship between each other. When Routes are bound to a Gateway it means their collective routing rules are configured on the underlying load balancers or proxies and the Routes are accessible through the Gateway. Thus, a Gateway is a logical representation of a networking data plane that can be configured through Routes.

> ![route and gateway binding](./route-binding.png )

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![route and gateway binding](route-binding.png )
```

### Administrative Delegation

The split between Gateway and Route resources allows the cluster administrator to delegate some of the routing configuration to individual teams while still retaining centralized control. The following Gateway resource exposes HTTPS on port 443 and terminates all traffic on the port with a certificate controlled by the cluster administrator.

```
kind: Gateway
apiVersion: networking.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
metadata:
  name: prod-web
spec:
  gatewayClassName: acme-lb
  listeners:  
  - protocol: HTTPS
    port: 443
    routes:
      kind: HTTPRoute
      selector:
        matchLabels:
          gateway: external-https-prod
      namespaces:
        from: All
    tls:
      certificateRef:
        name: admin-controlled-cert
```

> The following HTTPRoute shows how the Gateway selects the Route via it’s kind (HTTPRoute) and resource labels (gateway=external-https-prod). 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The following HTTPRoute shows how the Gateway selects the Route via its `kind` (HTTPRoute) and resource labels (`gateway=external-https-prod`).
```

I'd say that the following manifest snippet is an example of an HTTPRoute that the Gateway's selector would match.

Reviewer 4: How about:
```suggestion
The following HTTPRoute shows how the Route can ensure it matches the Gateway's selector via it’s `kind` (HTTPRoute) and resource labels (`gateway=external-https-prod`). 
```

```

> kind: HTTPRoute

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# Matches the required kind selector on the Gateway
kind: HTTPRoute
```

apiVersion: networking.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
metadata:
  name: foo-route
  namespace: foo-ns
  labels:

>     gateway: external-https-prod

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    # Matches the required label selector on the Gateway
    gateway: external-https-prod
```

...
```

### Role Oriented Design

> When you put it all together, you have a single load balancing infrastructure that can be safely shared by multiple teams. The Gateway API not only more a expressive API for advanced routing, but is also a role-oriented API, designed for of multi-tenant infrastructure. It’s extensibility ensures that it will evolve for future use-cases while preserving portability. Ultimately these characteristics will allow Gateway API to adapt to different organizational models and implementations well into the future.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When you put it all together, you have a single load balancing infrastructure that can be safely shared by multiple teams. The Gateway API not only more a expressive API for advanced routing, but is also a role-oriented API, designed for of multi-tenant infrastructure. Its extensibility ensures that it will evolve for future use-cases while preserving portability. Ultimately these characteristics will allow Gateway API to adapt to different organizational models and implementations well into the future.
```
